Blog post: Rust NIFs in Elixir (#1157)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2020-06-19-rustler-nif.md

---

> title: Writing NIFs With Rustler Is Getting Simpler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Writing NIFs for Elixir With Rustler
```

It might not be immediately clear to everyone that this is about NIFs for Elixir if you don't mention it in the title?

Author: I agree, although I think it's still important to hint at the upcoming changes to rustler in the title?

Reviewer: I had the feeling the text doesn't really focus a lot on how things were before and how they are now simpler. I think that's fine though – you're just explaining how stuff works with the latest version of Rustler?

I realize you'd probably want to say something about everything being very different/more complex in the earlier releases 🤔

Reviewer: Hm, maybe it should really be

```suggestion
title: Writing NIFs for Elixir in Rust with Rustler
```

since it's maybe not clear to everyone that Rustler is for Rust 🤔

Author: In that case, how about 
```suggestion
title: Writing Rust NIFs with Rustler for Elixir
```

Author: Or even
```suggestion
title: Rustler: Writing Rust NIFs for Elixir 
```

Reviewer: How about

```suggestion
title: Writing Rust NIFs for Elixir with Rustler
```

? ;)

author: 'Niklas Long'
github: niklaslong
twitter: niklas_long
topic: elixir
bio: 'Backend Engineer, author of Breethe API'
description:
  'Niklas Long describes the upcoming changes to Rustler and how it simplifies
  implementing NIFs.'
---

> A Native Implemented Function is implemented in Rust (or C) and can be called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Native Implemented Function is implemented in C (or Rust in the case of Rustler) and can be called
```

Author: Changed to _implemented in C (or Rust when using Rustler)_

from Elixir or Erlang just like any other function. It's the simplest and

> fastest way to run Rust code from Erlang but it does come with a caveat: a crash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fastest way to run native code from Erlang but it does come with a caveat: a crash
```

in a NIF can bring down the whole BEAM. This makes Rust a safer option than C
for implementing NIFs as its type system and ownership model guarantee memory
and thread-safety.

<!--break-->

[Rustler](https://github.com/rusterlium/rustler) is a fantastic project built to
make writing Rust NIFs a simple process; and the upcoming v0.22 release will

> provide a much cleaner syntax for declaring them. The library handles encoding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide a much cleaner syntax for doing so. The library handles encoding
```

Author: I changed it to `do do so`.

and decoding Rust values into Erlang terms, catches Rust panics before they
unwind to C and _should_ make it impossible to crash the BEAM from a Rust NIF.

## Getting started with Rustler

One of my first forays into Rust implemented NIFs was while building a
micro-library providing base 64 encoding and decoding, creatively named
[base64](https://github.com/niklaslong/base64). It's utterly pointless as that
functionality comes built-in to Elixir but I wanted to start with something
simple. On the plus side, this meant I could easily compare the performance of
the NIF version to the Elixir implementation which can be found in the
[`Base` module](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Base.html).

The library consists of two functions: `encode/2` and `decode/2` and it's using
[rust-base64](https://github.com/marshallpierce/rust-base64) to do the heavy
lifting in the NIFs. Let's walk through how this all works.

To get started, we need a new mix project with rustler installed as a
dependency. I'm using the v0.22-rc by tracking the `master` branch.

```bash
mix new base64

> # add rustler to mix.exs deps

Reviewer: Might it make sense to add `{:rustler, "~> 0.22-rc"}` to this comment?

mix deps.get
mix rustler.new
# follow rustler instructions
```

Let's explore the project's resulting structure (I've left out the usual Elixir
files and directories and focused on `lib` and `native`):

```
.
├── lib
│   └── base64.ex
└── native
    └── base64_nif
        ├── Cargo.lock
        ├── Cargo.toml
        ├── README.md
        └── src
            └── lib.rs
```

- `lib` will contain Elixir code (like any standard mix project).
- `base64.ex` will contain the stubs to our NIFs. This is the Elixir module the
  NIF module will be registered to.
- `native` will be home to the Rust code. In fact, a cargo package has been
  created within this directory (in this case named `base64_nif`).
- `lib.rs` will contain the NIFs.

The Rust NIFs are compiled and linked into a shared library loaded by Erlang
code at runtime. Elixir (or Erlang) implementations of the functions are also
necessary. These are usually minimal stubs defining the name and arity of the
NIFs and serve as fallback implementations if the NIFs aren't loaded. Let's
start with the Elixir stubs.

> `lib/base64.ex`
> 
> ```elixir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```elixir
# lib/base64.ex

```

defmodule Base64 do
  use Rustler, otp_app: :base64, crate: "base64_nif"

  @spec decode(binary, atom) :: binary
  def decode(_b64, _opt \\ :standard), do: error()

  @spec encode(binary, atom) :: binary
  def encode(_s, _opt \\ :standard), do: error()

  defp error(), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
end
```

The first line is configuration and lets Rustler know what Rust crate to compile
for the Elixir module.

As mentioned above, `decode/2` and `encode/2` don't actually implement any
decoding or encoding; they simply call `error/0` if the NIFs can't be found.
However, the names and the arguments must match in both the Rust and Elixir
implementations. Both functions take in a `binary` to be encoded or decoded and
an `atom` for configuration as different character sets that can be used
(url-safe, without padding, etc...). The default is fittingly set to
`:standard`. The Rust NIFs are implemented as follows.

> `native/base64_nif/src/lib.rs`
> 
> ```rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`native/base64_nif/src/lib.rs`

```rust
// native/base64_nif/src/lib.rs

```

mentioned earlier, which we'll use for encoding and decoding, and the
`rustler::Atom` type which allows us to represent an Elixir/Erlang `atom` in
Rust. Both the `rustler` and `base64` crates have been added to the `Cargo.toml`
dependencies.

The `rustler::atoms` macro defines Rust functions that return Erlang atoms; in
this case, the possible options for the `encode/2` and `decode/2` functions.

Finally, we come to the NIF definitions. The functions take in a `String` and a
`rustler::Atom`, and return a `String`. This is consistent with the Elixir
stubs, as are the names. In this case, the conversions between Rust values and
Elixir terms are conveniently handled by Rustler. However, for more complex
types, this may need to be implemented manually.

## How does it compare to the Elixir implementation?

Rust is fast. Really fast. This was my set-up (using
[benchee](https://github.com/bencheeorg/benchee)):

```
Operating System: macOS
CPU Information: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-4258U CPU @ 2.40GHz
Number of Available Cores: 4
Available memory: 16 GB
Elixir 1.10.2
Erlang 22.3.2
```

I used _hello world_ as the short string and Sarah Kay’s poem _B (If I Should

> Have a Daughter)_ as the longer string.

Reviewer: Is the poem available online anywhere so we could link to it?

Author: As it's spoken work poetry I've added a link to her Ted talk which she opens with this poem.
